In the previous video, we have done configuring inter vlan routing.
And now all vlan can communicate each others.
But for now we need to configure the ip
address of all pc one by one manually.
In this video we are going
to learn about dhcp server.
If we configure a dhcp server, we don’t need to
configure the ip address of pc manually anymore.
Okay let’s just start, we will
configure dhcp server in the router.
Enable, and then go to global configuration mode.
To configure dhcp server, the command is ip dhcp
pool and then the name of the pool.
We can use anything for the pool name. But usually we
will use the vlan number or the vlan name
for the pool name, for example
we can use vlan 10 or accounting.
But actually we can use anything for the pool
name. For now, let’s say I will use vlan10.
Next we need to define a network,
because this pool is for vlan 10,
so the network is 192.168.10.0 and
the subnetmask is 255.255.255.0.
Next we will need to configure default-router,
the default router will become the gateway for
the pc in the vlan 10. So here default-router
and then the gateway for vlan 10, which is the
ip address of router it self, so 192.168.10.1.
Next we also can configure dns. So dns-server and
the the dns server, usually we will use google
dns server, which is 8.8.8.8. Okay now we have
done configuring the dhcp server for vlan 10.
To test it, we can configure the
dhcp client in all of pc vlan 10.
Let’s start from room 1. Here we can choose dhcp,
and here we can see that dhcp request successful.
Here we can see that the
ip address is 192.168.10.2,
this ip address is automatically
assigned to the pc by dhcp server.
Let’s configure dhcp client in the other pc.
Here we can see that this is also success.
Next this is also vlan 10, here also success,
Next let’s try here. This is also
success, the ip address is 192.168.10.5.
Last, let’s configure for vlan 10 in room 3,
okay here success, the ip address is 10.6,
and last here this is also
success. The ip address is 10.7.
Okay so now the dhcp server
configuration for vlan 10 is done.
Next let’s configure dhcp server for vlan 1.
Ip dhcp pool vlan1, the network is 192.168.1.0
and the subnetmask is 255.255.255.0. The default
router is the ip address of router for vlan 1,
which is 192.168.1.1. and
the dns server is 8.8.8.8.
Next for vlan 20. Ip dhcp pool vlan 20.
The network is 192.168.20.0 255.255.255.0,
default router 192.168.20.1,
and then dns-server 8.8.8.8.
Last for vlan 30, ip dhcp pool vlan 30.
Network 192.168.30.0 255.255.255.0
default router 192.168.30.1,
and dns-server 8.8.8.8
Okay now we have done configuring
dhcp server for all vlan.
Now let’s configure dhcp client on all pc.
I will speed up the video until the
configuration off all pc is done.
Okay so now all pc can get an ip address
automatically from dhcp server.
I think enough for this video and see you on the next video!